Article 14#Article 14 paragraph 1 & Article 14 paragraph 2.£14(1) A manufacturer shall notify any actively exploited vulnerability contained in the product with digital elements that it becomes aware of simultaneously to the CSIRT designated as coordinator, in accordance with paragraph 7 of this Article, and to ENISA. The manufacturer shall notify that actively exploited vulnerability via the single reporting platform established pursuant to Article 16. 14(2) For the purposes of the notification referred to in paragraph 1, the manufacturer shall submit: (a) an early warning notification of an actively exploited vulnerability, without undue delay and in any event within 24 hours of the manufacturer becoming aware of it, indicating, where applicable, the Member States on the territory of which the manufacturer is aware that their product with digital elements has been made available; (b) unless the relevant information has already been provided, a vulnerability notification, without undue delay and in any event within 72 hours of the manufacturer becoming aware of the actively exploited vulnerability, which shall provide general information, as available, about the product with digital elements concerned, the general nature of the exploit and of the vulnerability concerned as well as any corrective or mitigating measures taken, and corrective or mitigating measures that users can take, and which shall also indicate, where applicable, how sensitive the manufacturer considers the notified information to be; (c) unless the relevant information has already been provided, a final report, no later than 14 days after a corrective or mitigating measure is available, including at least the following: (i) a description of the vulnerability, including its severity and impact; (ii) where available, information concerning any malicious actor that has exploited or that is exploiting the vulnerability; (iii) details about the security update or other corrective measures that have been made available to remedy the vulnerability.@1. Does the company have the necessary processes and technical capabilities to identify vulnerabilities in its products and detect when they are being exploited? 2. Has the company didentified an appropriate CSIRT coordinator and ENISA contact for notifications? 3. Is there a documented notification process with clearly defined roles and responsibilities, and approved communication channels? 4. Has the company incorporated the requirements of this article regarding notification timelines into its internal procedures? 5. Has the company conducted testing to confirm its capability to meet notification obligations? 
Article 14#Article 14 paragraph 3 & Article 14 paragraph 4.£14(3) A manufacturer shall notify any severe incident having an impact on the security of the product with digital elements that it becomes aware of simultaneously to the CSIRT designated as coordinator, in accordance with paragraph 7 of this Article, and to ENISA. The manufacturer shall notify that incident via the single reporting platform established pursuant to Article 16. 14(4) For the purposes of the notification referred to in paragraph 3, the manufacturer shall submit: (a) an early warning notification of a severe incident having an impact on the security of the product with digital elements, without undue delay and in any event within 24 hours of the manufacturer becoming aware of it, including at least whether the incident is suspected of being caused by unlawful or malicious acts, which shall also indicate, where applicable, the Member States on the territory of which the manufacturer is aware that their product with digital elements has been made available; (b) unless the relevant information has already been provided, an incident notification, without undue delay and in any event within 72 hours of the manufacturer becoming aware of the incident, which shall provide general information, where available, about the nature of the incident, an initial assessment of the incident, as well as any corrective or mitigating measures taken, and corrective or mitigating measures that users can take, and which shall also indicate, where applicable, how sensitive the manufacturer considers the notified information to be; (c) unless the relevant information has already been provided, a final report, within one month after the submission of the incident notification under point (b), including at least the following: (i) a detailed description of the incident, including its severity and impact; (ii) the type of threat or root cause that is likely to have triggered the incident; (iii) applied and ongoing mitigation measures.@1. Does the company have the necessary processes and technical capabilities (e.g., logging and monitoring) to detect severe incidents in a timely manner? 2. Has the company identified an appropriate CSIRT coordinator and ENISA contact for notifications? 3. Is there a documented notification process with clearly defined roles and responsibilities, and approved communication channels? 4. Has the company incorporated the requirements of this article regarding notification timelines into its internal procedures? 5. Has the company conducted testing to confirm its capability to meet notification obligations? 
Article 14#Article 14 paragraph 5.£14(5) For the purposes of paragraph 3, an incident having an impact on the security of the product with digital elements shall be considered to be severe where: (a) it negatively affects or is capable of negatively affecting the ability of a product with digital elements to protect the availability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of sensitive or important data or functions; or (b) it has led or is capable of leading to the introduction or execution of malicious code in a product with digital elements or in the network and information systems of a user of the product with digital elements.@Has the company documented the criteria for incident severity? If so, is the definition and criteria for a "severe" incident aligned with the requirements of this article and paragraph?
Article 14#Article 14 paragraph 6.£14(6) Where necessary, the CSIRT designated as coordinator initially receiving the notification may request manufacturers to provide an intermediate report on relevant status updates about the actively exploited vulnerability or severe incident having an impact on the security of the product with digital elements.@Does the company have clearly defined roles and responsibilities to provide intermediate reports and status updates, as well as a process in place to collect the data, prepare reports, and disseminate them?
Article 14#Article 14 paragraph 7.£14(7)The notifications referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article shall be submitted via the single reporting platform referred to in Article 16 using one of the electronic notification end-points referred to in Article 16(1). The notification shall be submitted using the electronic notification end-point of the CSIRT designated as coordinator of the Member State where the manufacturers have their main establishment in the Union and shall be simultaneously accessible to ENISA. For the purposes of this Regulation, a manufacturer shall be considered to have its main establishment in the Union in the Member State where the decisions related to the cybersecurity of its products with digital elements are predominantly taken. If such a Member State cannot be determined, the main establishment shall be considered to be in the Member State where the manufacturer concerned has the establishment with the highest number of employees in the Union. Where a manufacturer has no main establishment in the Union, it shall submit the notifications referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 using the electronic notification end-point of the CSIRT designated as coordinator in the Member State determined pursuant to the following order and based on the information available to the manufacturer: (a) the Member State in which the authorised representative acting on behalf of the manufacturer for the highest number of products with digital elements of that manufacturer is established; (b) the Member State in which the importer placing on the market the highest number of products with digital elements of that manufacturer is established;@1. Has the company identified an applicable EU member state that meets the definition discussed in paragraph 7? 2. Does the company have access to the Single Reporting Platform and a designated person to manage it? 3. Has the company designated a CSIRT coordinator in the EU member state where the manufacturer has its main establishment? 4. Does the company possess the technical capabilities to establish a connection to the electronic notification endpoint of the Single Reporting Platform? 
Article 14#Article 14 paragraph 8.£14(8)After becoming aware of an actively exploited vulnerability or a severe incident having an impact on the security of the product with digital elements, the manufacturer shall inform the impacted users of the product with digital elements, and where appropriate all users, of that vulnerability or incident and, where necessary, of any risk mitigation and corrective measures that the users can deploy to mitigate the impact of that vulnerability or incident, where appropriate in a structured, machine-readable format that is easily automatically processable. Where the manufacturer fails to inform the users of the product with digital elements in a timely manner, the notified CSIRTs designated as coordinators may provide such information to the users when considered to be proportionate and necessary for preventing or mitigating the impact of that vulnerability or incident.@1. Does the company have a documented procedure and the necessary technical capabilities to identify all users of devices where a vulnerability has been detected and exploited? 2. Is there a process and corresponding technical solution to notify users of exploited vulnerabilities and propose remediation steps in a structured, machine-readable format that can be easily processed automatically?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(1).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall identify and document vulnerabilities and components contained in products with digital elements, including by drawing up a software bill of materials in a commonly used and machine-readable format covering at the very least the top-level dependencies of the products@1. Does the company have a process with clearly defined roles and responsibilities to identify vulnerabilities in all of its electronic products? 2. Has the company established a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) for all of its products? Are there clearly defined roles and responsibilities to maintain and update it? 3. Is there evidence to support that all products are included in the SBOM and the vulnerability management process?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(2).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall in relation to the risks posed to products with digital elements, address and remediate vulnerabilities without delay, including by providing security updates; where technically feasible, new security updates shall be provided separately from functionality updates;@1. Has the company documented timelines for vulnerability remediation based on risk or severity? 2. Is there a process in place to monitor known vulnerabilities and ensure that security updates are released promptly for all of them? 3. Is there a defined process to provide security updates independently from functionality updates?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(3).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall apply effective and regular tests and reviews of the security of the product with digital elements;@1. Has the company specified what tests shall be performed, such as penetration testing? 2. Has the frequency or timing of these tests (for example, during deployment), been clearly defined? 3. Is there a process in place to ensure that tests are conducted for all products as intended?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(4).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall once a security update has been made available, share and publicly disclose information about fixed vulnerabilities, including a description of the vulnerabilities, information allowing users to identify the product with digital elements affected, the impacts of the vulnerabilities, their severity and clear and accessible information helping users to remediate the vulnerabilities; in duly justified cases, where manufacturers consider the security risks of publication to outweigh the security benefits, they may delay making public information regarding a fixed vulnerability until after users have been given the possibility to apply the relevant patch;@1. Does the company have a documented process, roles, responsibilities, and approved communication channels to share information about security patches for their products? Are there documented timelines for such notifications? 2. Has the company approved the contents of such notifications, and do they match requirements? 3. Is there a documented process or a responsible approval authority to decide when the security risks of publishing outweigh the security benefits?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(5).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall put in place and enforce a policy on coordinated vulnerability disclosure.@Is there a coordinated vulnerability disclosure policy? Does it cover process, roles, responsibilities, communication channels, contents?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(6).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall take measures to facilitate the sharing of information about potential vulnerabilities in their product with digital elements as well as in third-party components contained in that product, including by providing a contact address for the reporting of the vulnerabilities discovered in the product with digital elements.@Is there a defined process regarding the sharing of information about potential vulnerabilities in the company's products? Does it cover roles, responsibilities, and communication channels for sharing? Does it include third-party components? Is there a process for users or other third parties to report vulnerabilities in the company's products? Has the company published that process (including contact details)?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(7).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall provide for mechanisms to securely distribute updates for products with digital elements to ensure that vulnerabilities are fixed or mitigated in a timely manner and, where applicable for security updates, in an automatic manner.@1. Has the company implemented technical capabilities to deliver security updates to its products? 2. What communication security measures are in place to ensure that malicious updates are not deployed? 3. Has the company performed any security testing of the channels used to deliver security updates?
Annex I part II#Annex I part II(8).£Manufacturers of products with digital elements shall ensure that, where security updates are available to address identified security issues, they are disseminated without delay and, unless otherwise agreed between a manufacturer and a business user in relation to a tailor-made product with digital elements, free of charge, accompanied by advisory messages providing users with the relevant information, including on potential action to be taken.@1. Has the company defined SLAs for distributing security updates based on risk and severity levels? 2. Are security updates free of charge? 3. Has the company documented a requirement to include advisory messages in its security updates?